Library Management System — README
1. Project Title

Library Management System using Python

2. Introduction

A library plays a major role in academics by providing books and learning resources to students and faculty. Traditionally, libraries maintain records manually using registers which becomes difficult to manage when the number of books and users increases.

Manual systems have various drawbacks such as:

Time-consuming book search

Difficulty in maintaining issued book records

Chances of human error in updates

Misplacement or loss of records

No fast backup or retrieval system

To overcome these issues, a computer-based Library Management System is necessary.
This project is a console-based Python application that digitizes library functions including adding books, viewing book lists, searching for books, and issuing books to readers. The project makes use of Python’s file handling concept to store data permanently in .txt files so information remains safe even after the program is closed.

It is built using a modular programming approach, improving readability and future expansion. This makes it highly useful for beginners to understand real-world system design while applying Python fundamentals.

Overall, this software improves efficiency, reduces workload, ensures accurate data storage, and provides quicker access to book records. It acts as the foundation for future advanced library automation systems.

3. Objectives

To computerize library book records

To provide fast searching and issuing operations

To store information safely using digital files

To reduce errors in manual record-keeping

To learn implementation of file handling in Python

To design a scalable system that can be upgraded later

4. Scope of the Project

Academic library book management

Small-scale library operations

Beginner learning for Python file/data storage

Real use in schools, tuition centers, and institutes

5. Features of the System
Feature	Purpose
Add Book	Store Book ID, Title, Author in digital format
View Books	Display complete list of available books
Search Book	Find books using title or author keywords
Issue Book	Track which user took which book
Permanent Record Storage	Information remains saved in .txt files
6. Technology Used
Component	Implementation
Programming Language	Python 3.x
Programming Concepts	File Handling, Conditional Logic, Modular Design
Storage	Text Files — books.txt & issued_books.txt
Interface	Command Line (Terminal/VS Code)
7. System Requirements

Windows / Linux / MacOS

Python 3.8 or above

Command-line support

Minimum 2GB RAM

8. Working Principle

User chooses an option from the menu

System takes required input (book details/search keyword etc.)

Python reads/writes data in text files

books.txt → stores existing books

issued_books.txt → stores issued book records

Output displayed instantly to the user

This maintains data persistence and quick data retrieval.

9. Folder Structure
Library-Management-System/
│
├─ main.py
│
├─ modules/
│   ├─ add_book.py
│   ├─ view_books.py
│   ├─ issue_book.py
│   └─ search_book.py
│
└─ data/
    ├─ books.txt
    └─ issued_books.txt

10. Steps to Install & Run

Install Python 3.x

Download the project folder

Open terminal inside the folder

Run command:

python main.py


Menu will appear → Select the required operation.

11. Testing Strategy

Book added must be visible through View Books

Search must display correct matching result

Issued book entry should appear in issued_books.txt

System must not crash even if books list is empty

Testing confirms that all basic modules function properly.

12. Limitations

No system to return issued books

No fine calculation for late returns

No login or user access control

Only text-file storage (no database)

Console-based interface only

13. Future Scope / Enhancements
Planned Upgrade	Purpose
Return Book feature	To maintain availability status
Fine Calculation	To monitor late submissions
Login/Authentication	Admin-only access
Database Integration (MySQL/SQLite)	Store records more securely
GUI using Tkinter or Web App	Better user experience

These enhancements can convert it into a fully-featured professional library software.

14. Conclusion

The Library Management System successfully replaces manual book-record keeping with a simple digital solution. It improves data management, accuracy, and productivity.
The project demonstrates Python file handling, modular coding and practical application development for academic use.
It can be extended further with advanced features to serve larger libraries effectively.

15. Developer Details

Name : Your Name Here
Course : Your Class Name
Institute : Your College Name
Academic Year : 2024-2025
